We have half an hour with you. So you can start by some opening remarks, and then
there will be questions from members. Thank you, if that's okay with you.
Okay.
Yeah. Thanks.
Chair and members, thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
By way of brief reminder for those who haven't met us before,
NZGCP is a Crown-owned company established in
2002. Our shareholding ministers are the Minister of Finance
and the Minister for Economic Growth, both of whom are Mr.
Willis at this point.We receive a
$750,000 annual appropriation for market
development.
Our investment activity and our operating costs are funded from
returns from our portfolio or from Elevate,
which we manage for the guardians of New Zealand
Superannuation.
Our job is to help build a deeper, more capable
early-stage capital market in New Zealand.
We do that by investing alongside private investors at the points where
the market is still thin,
by lifting investor capability, and by generating better
data on what is actually happening in the startup
ecosystem.
I'd like to introduce our Chief Executive, James Pinner.
Members of this committee will recognize James from his appearance last
September when he sat at this table as our Chief Investment Officer.
James was appointed to the CEO role effective from January this year,
and so that appointment makes for continuity
and deep operational depth and knowledge at
a moment when the market itself is starting to mature.
Three observations from FY25 before I hand over to
James.
First, the headline.
FY25 was the year in which patient early-stage
public capital began to really deliver tangible
outcomes back to the Crown.
Realizations from companies including Cami and
Tradify and Quantify Photonics returned
49 and a half, almost $59 million
in cash to our Aspire Seed Fund.
Elevate received over $20 million in distributions, the
first material returns from its underlying venture
funds. That capital is now being recycled into the
next generation of young New Zealand companies.
Five years ago, the venture market here was too thin to produce
results like this. That it now does, after a difficult
two years, is the clearest indicator that the model is working.
Secondly, the market itself is genuinely deepening.
Since inception, Elevate has committed
$246 million
across 11 venture capital funds, supporting more than
160 high-growth, young New
Zealand companies.
Aspire achieved a one to seven leverage ratio in
FY25, meaning every dollar of public capital
attracted $7 of private
investment. The Crown's positive five-year
review of Elevate and the additional $100 million
allocated in last year's budget reflect confidence in that
direction.
Thirdly, the board is satisfied that NZGCP is a
well-run organization.
We delivered $400,000 to $450,000 in structural
efficiencies, held underlying operating costs
flat year on year, and managed an orderly
leadership transition.
We met or exceeded the majority of our performance
measures. Where we fell short of target, we have reported that
openly.
So I'll now hand over to James to take you through the
operational picture and the year ahead.
Thank you, Annabelle, and thank you, Chair. Thank you, members.
As Annabelle mentioned, it's good to be back, and this time in my new role as Chief
Executive.
It genuinely is a privilege to have taken over the CEO role at NZGCP,
both because of the amazing organization and the work that the team's doing, but
also just because there's a pivotal moment in their whole startup ecosystem,
and there's so much more growth that we want to see.
Before I run through the year in question for NZGCP, I also wanted to run through,
just sort of set the scale of ambition for NZGCP and the startup ecosystem as a
whole. We have broadly sort of enterprises that we call it the five fives, where we
want to see 5,000 high-tech startups in New Zealand
creating $50 billion in economic value, creating 50,000 new high-paid
jobs. And we believe that will require around $5 billion of capital over
the next five years from private
investors and government as well,
which is less than 5% of our current KiwiSaver balances in New Zealand.
So we have the capital to do this and to accelerate that growth.
The point of those numbers isn't around absolute precision, it's around
proportionality. The capital required to build New Zealand,
a genuinely productive ecosystem and tech economy, is
small relative to what New Zealand already has.
The private assets already exist in this country, and it's around capitalizing
those. And NZGCP's role is to capitalize that capital
into high-growth tech companies.
New Zealand has the raw capability to do this and the talent to do so, which is why
it's so inspiring and why
we have such a healthy pipeline of companies at the moment.
New Zealand's come a long way and we need to keep our momentum heading forwards.
I want to cover three things. What FY25 told us about the market,
what didn't go so well, and what FY26 looks like.
On the market, compared to the picture I described in September last year, the
position has moved significantly.
The latest data from our young company finance report, which covers the whole of
calendar year 2025, has shown a total early-stage
investment of 754 million, which is a 61% increase from the
previous year. Importantly, this isn't a single mega round, although there are a
couple of significant rounds in there from the likes of Holter and
AivoAI, but 59 of the 91 deals were over a million
dollars, and the number of $10 million rounds has followed
an increasing trend over the last five years, and there were 12 deals over
$10 million.
This supports the deepening pipeline of companies that are maturing sufficiently to
support those kind of funding, but also the fact that there is more capital
available to support them.So the depth of
the market is clearly developing.
At a later stage of the market, the pipeline underneath is developing, but there
are still some gaps at the very, very early stage, which we'll address
in a minute.
Within this picture, Aspire delivered above expectations on almost every measure.
We reviewed well over 200 venture scale investment opportunities,
completed 21 investments across 10 new deals and 11 follow-on deals, and
crowded in, as I know I've also mentioned, private capital at a ratio of seven to
one.
The realizations are a long time in the making.
Some of these companies, we had invested in 13, 14 years before.
So again, these things take time, and we have to keep supporting the
market.
Again, and a number of companies that
Aspire developed and had progressed to the Series A stage, which is when the
institutional capital was coming in, had again risen to 12 last year as opposed
to our target of five to 10.
For Elevate, again, this is the sort of
year the underlying funds were beginning to mature, their portfolio is beginning to
mature. We made two new fund commitments in the last
financial year,
committing $25 million to funds, which was supported by another $86
million of private capital.
The underlying funds now support well over 160 companies underneath them.
And the annual report, which Elevate's actually covered also in
the New Zealand Super annual report, showed a total value of paid-in
capital, which is the ratio of the current holding bar value compared to what we've
actually contributed of 1.02. I'm happy to say that that is now
currently sitting at 1.41.
That is showing a gross IRR, which is an annualized return of over
14%, and after fees of over 11%.
That includes a portfolio of funds, which includes new
investments, which are very early state on in their career.
And generally, venture capital is a five to seven-year sort of return period.
So some of the investments we've only made in the last 12 months, but still on a
blended basis, we're recording
our investments worth 40% more than the value we invested.
The numbers are useful, but they are somewhat abstract, especially in the early
stages until realizations come through and we start seeing the true fruition
of all our work, but stories are much more meaningful.
So in particular, I'd like to highlight some of the companies that we've invested
through Aspire and Elevate, including Holter.
I'm sure most members are familiar with that, enabling livestock
and cattle farmers around the world.
Partly, building the global standard for vehicle parts.
Both of these companies are well into Series D and E territory, raising
valuations of multi-hundred million dollars and billions in Holter's
case.
These are what's feeding some of the growth and returns.
Another company, Aura, which again, I'm sure some of the members are
familiar with. This is now operating across the US, UK, Australia, New
Zealand in retail crime intelligence and has become one of the strongest
examples of New Zealand software companies scaling globally.
I read some stats yesterday, I think they are now protecting over six million
retail
workers globally.
Auro Biosurgery, another early-stage company, well, a
company that Aspire backed early.
It's now ASX listed and selling soft tissue regeneration products
across into US hospitals.
Beyond that cohort sits a layer of other deep tech and frontier firms the committee
should know about. Kryten is building a secure operating system for critical
infrastructure at a time when critical cybersecurity is increasingly a
sovereign concern. Scios Aerospace is delivering defense and aerospace
capability that simply did not exist in New Zealand five years ago.
Companies like Aivo in legal AI and Basis in reinventing the home circuit board,
and just down the road from here, OpenStar, making headway in solving
nuclear fusion. None of these will succeed because of
NZGCP, but each has at some point benefited from a market that now
has more capital and more capable investors and more pathways through to scale than
it ever did.
That is why this model exists, to keep more of those companies in New Zealand and
to help them scale faster.
And closer to the front of the cycle, where Aspire and shortly Scout will sit,
we're seeing more and more AI-enabled businesses coming through and more deep tech
companies like Zefoss and Atomic Teslater helping
solve some of the critical minerals issues.
Aquafortis, developing some of the cleanest and potentially cheapest water
treatment solutions in the world.
Sentient Bio, creating the digital nose for future
technologies. Volumio,
allowing early-stage stroke detection.
Avasa, helping microsurgery around the world.
These are just some of the examples of the amazing technology that's coming out of
New Zealand, and will be the frontier firms of our economy.
And what didn't go so well? Changing tack.
Three things to address. I guess Elevate's new fund commitments of $25 million was
below our target of $40 million,
reflecting generally difficult markets, especially for fundraising for private
funds.
On the
investment leverage of Elevate, it was at 3.4 to one, which was slightly below our
target of 3.5 to one.
And we met only one of our four medium-term capability
targets. So the diversity of the venture capital
market is definitely not where it needs to be.
Only 19% of general partners in VC firms are female, and none
identifies Maori.
We're looking to address both of these issues.
We have launched in August last year a new venture capital learning
platform called Venture Ed. Still very much in the early days, but
we're hopeful that that will lead to more
diversity and a broader pool of capital and capability in the venture capital
market.
We're also, through 2026, re-engaging on our Maori engagement
strategy to enable more capital to flow into this space.
This is very early stages, and we want to do this in a collaborative way, so it
will be around engagement and trying to find the right solutions.
We are in a privileged position of not having to sell a product.
We are generally wanting to do this in
collaboration.And none of
this happens in isolation. We're working closely with MB on our policy
settings, including the aforementioned Elevate review and the work they're doing
with the Spire settings.
We're working with Treasury on capital formation and the $100 million Elevate
allocation, and the guardians of NZ Super as our sole LP,
and providing additional governance and support and oversight.
We also work with other parts of MB, the public research organizations,
universities, and Kiwi Networks on commercializable science, and likewise,
accelerators like Ministry of Awesome and Creative HQ,
and the tech incubators. And we've also deepened our collaboration with
NZTE and Invest NZ on getting better access to global markets
and aligning our collective desire to bring more foreign direct investment into
this space. And the science systems are now well underway, and we're looking
forward to
creating more pipeline of commercializable companies.
Looking forward to 2026,
we are focusing on deploying Elevate's remaining capacity of around
$125 million. And shortly on the early-stage direct
investments, we'll be launching a trial of a scout program, which was announced by
Minister Willis a few weeks ago. And this is to bring early-stage,
fast-moving investment into the very formative stages of new
private companies. And then finally, as I mentioned, Venture Ed
platform and developing that.
To close, the position that I said at this table last September was very
different, and a difficult position last year in the markets.
We're explaining why returns were taking longer than anyone expected or than we
wanted.
And the market was pulling back at that time.
There was a lot of global uncertainty.
But currently, the position I sit in now is one where those returns are beginning
to come through. We're starting to see the realizations flow through.
We still have a long way to go. This is a very long journey to build a
self-sustaining ecosystem.
But we genuinely believe that we have the raw
capability and talent in this country to develop the technology
sector as a major driver of the future economy.
I hate to interrupt, James, but how much is left in your notes?
That's it. Yeah.
You just finished then.
Yes.
Yep. That's wonderful. Thank you so much.
And I think that was really comprehensive and might have already answered some of
the questions that members had. But we will, yeah, go on to
questions. Arina Williams.
Thank you.
So many different objectives
for especially the Elevate Fund. And can we
hone in first on the
rules that apply internally to the liquidity of the
SP12? I'm interested in, you said a five to seven-year
timeframe for your investments. Lots of VCs would see that as even longer.
Yeah.
Maybe 10, 15. So how,
when we're thinking about many of these investments are for people's retirements,
and they get when they turn
65, and they can realize those assets.
So, how are you planning internally for what kind of
timeframe is appropriate for your investments as a part of the whole?
And how do you
plan out for when the funds hold real
assets closer to your fund?
When they have a longer stake in them, how do you manage then holding
assets which
you can't realize quickly?
I guess it's important to say we sit alongside NZ Super.
So we have different, obviously, goals in terms of superannuation.
And different goals. Yeah.
And we have under legislation, when Elevate was set up, it
was a 15-year investment period. So we started in 2020,
and we will keep recycling capital until 2025, and then after that,
it's basically a government decision on whether to keep going or to just harvest
that cash and use it into the Crown.
We have very little ability to control
liquidity, so we are really patient capital.
Early realizations are rare,
and we've been very fortunate so far we've had some, but that isn't, as
you've mentioned, it is a long-term game, so we should be expecting
realizations more in the year 7 to 10.
So at the moment, we factor sort of when we expect
realizations to be coming, and that will factor with how much money we expect
to recycle. We actually can't deploy any more capital until we've actually
physically received the cash. So we are limited to the $400 million we've had,
plus the $20 million we've had. We can
forward-plan, but we can't actually do anything until we've actually physically
received the cash. So from a liquidity point, it was really hard to manage at this
stage. If the market was broader, which I think it will be in maybe 5, 10 years'
time, there probably will be opportunities for secondary options.
And it is potentially something we can look at in terms of stimulating some more
private investment into the space, maybe allowing some secondary options for
private investors to buy some of our stakes, which are a bit more mature.
Just one second. Yeah. I just want to pick up on the issue about
if the market was broader. I think everyone agrees that we're not there
yet, but the maturity of New Zealand's VC funds
is, well, we're still very early stage.
Yep.
Is that another part of your mandate?
How
do we measure that? How do we look at the way you have grown New Zealand's
pools of capital that are like you and performing in this
same sort of space?
Yeah. And we're currently updating our statement of intent and statement of
performance expectations, but our long-term goals are definitely measuring how much
private capital is coming into the space, how many VC funds, how much capital
is available to invest into New Zealand startups. They're the key measures.
So as the group market grows, and we can then bring in more institutional
capital, that's ultimately what our target is.
We want to see more companies progressing through the pipeline to Series A on
onwards, and we want to see more capital available to them.
Just going back-
The other side that you get from this,
coming in, is obviously creating companies that also employ
people and pay tax. So when people are going to retire and we're trying
to generate a lot of young people that are getting jobs, that are paying tax,
and-And earning that way. And
if I look at my own story, I founded the company in 1999, took it public in a
$100 million IPO in 2018.
We listed on the ASX, and
at the time, the
Australian investors wanted us to actually top hat into Australia so
we would become an Australian company, not a New Zealand one, and pay our tax there
as we made profits.
Because we had the right cap table and the right structure, we were able to
force a review of that and ensure that we stayed in New Zealand as a New Zealand
company and paid our tax here. So there is this other part of this, which is not
just about the financials that NZGCP is doing, but it's about all the other
companies that are getting created, the holders, and are employing
people here and paying their tax and employing ...
You say as people retire, they want their grandchildren, their children to have
jobs and to pay tax. So there is that part of what this
entity enables.
So you have a sub to that?
Just on the, is there a steady growth of other investors
coming into New Zealand, or have you seen international fund exits?
I think I read that only two of the funds that you've worked with have done
several raises.
Mm-hmm.
Is it steady growth or are you seeing ups and downs?
Ups and downs, definitely. It's still a very immature market.
So as you mentioned, we've got Blackbird and Movac who've got proven track records
and distributions, multiple vintages.
There's another cohort of firms which are one or two behind that, and there's a few
that aren't going to quite make it to the next vintage.
It is still incredibly hard to raise money.
But over time, as we widen that cohort of more established managers,
that's when we think more institutional KiwiSaver money and things will come into
it.
Okay. All right.
Supplementary, Dr. Hamish .
Excellent. Thank you. And I appreciate all the mentioning of the market is
maturing, and the ultimate goal is to have more companies go through the
pipeline. How do you see it changing over the last wee while?
Because the last thing I suppose is sprout out private money with
public money. Do you see it's a lack of available
capital, or is it actually a risk aversion and therefore your role
would actually be to invest in more riskier ones,
but then of course that would damage potentially your commercial performance?
It's both. Yeah. I think our role is to be the biggest risk-taker in the market.
So
private investors, particularly venture capital funds, generally come in at what we
call a Series A stage when companies are a bit more mature, a bit more proven, and
it's down to private individuals like angel investors and the likes of us to
help seed that market and take the highest risk.
It doesn't mean
... We're still targeting commercial returns to some degree, but it is
very difficult for our purposes. And the same with Elevate Funds.
Our job is to perhaps take a slightly higher risk
tolerance and back to more emerging managers than a traditional institutional
investor would, for example.
But at the same time, once we build more companies, and that's what we're beginning
to see now, more companies getting to the later stages, that does start bringing
more private capital as well. So for example, foreign, overseas,
especially US investors, okay, there was quite a few in 2021 when the markets were
really buoyant. But now as we've got a bigger cohort of companies progressing,
there's more for them to look at, so they're now taking more of an interest into
New Zealand as well. So capital will flow in, we believe, through there as well.
And a supplementary, Dr.
Yes. Grant, thank you very much for your example.
And that leads to my question, which in a way follows on from Hamish as
well, and that is,
do we actually have a sector strategy here in terms of what we're trying to achieve
for New Zealand Inc?
As we all know, we're missing large companies in the
middle.
Mm-hmm.
We've got lots of little ones and some big ones.
And the stickiness of that outcome really inspires me.
So is that part of how we approach our investor strategy?
And I appreciate the crowding in of private equity.
We've got a question on that
as well.
The reality is for this all to work, there are so many interdependencies.
We need everything from education, training our children to be working and looking
at science and technology, through to foreign direct
investment and taxation and things.
So I would say there's more we can do in terms of
having that unified strategy that brings it all together.
The science system reforms are welcome to getting more commercialization out of the
system.
But for this to work, we are literally only working on the capital and
investor capability piece of this.
Yeah.
The whole system has to work.
And we have been deliberately working proactively with the likes of NZTE, Invest in
Z, MB Treasury to try and-
I really appreciate what you guys do.
Mm-hmm.
It's a fabulous intervention.
But we have a problem in New Zealand of the stickiness of those
mid-size companies.
Mm-hmm.
They get to a stage and get bought out, right?
Yeah, and that's the cap table.
Yeah.
If you get the cap table right, and it's good, there are some good settings coming
through. So I was on the startup council advising the
last government on settings, and it's great to see some of
those policies coming into play, the ESOP, so that you can get staff who
are embedded so you keep the talent here.
Right.
The Investor Plus, because obviously if we can bring capital into the country
that stays in this country, like any growth company, to your point, that goes from
the middle to large-
Mm-hmm
... if they're global and they're getting traction, they'll get money.
They'll get money. We obviously want it to be New Zealand money-
Yeah
... because then it gets returned back into New Zealand.
So-
Of course, we want the Taiwan experience, right?
Yes.
Semiconductors-
Okay. All right
... Asia world.
Yes.
So private equity question just on the back of it.
Okay.
So I think we don't have that much time here now.
So I go to Dr. Kushla Tangeeman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Morena Kayto.
Private equity.
You mentioned your Māori engagement plan.
What does that look like, and what's your ultimate end game in
terms of Māori? And following on from that, um-
What's your relationship in terms of Maori investors?
It's not as good as it should be, honestly.
We have relatively good connections into some iwi.
Honestly, the plan for this next six months is really around conversations.
Every iwi has different risk appetites, different goals, and we want to work with
them to see how we can help. We have investor capability, which we
are willing to support and help them with different things.
We are happy to work with origination and upskill other
investors. We want to catalyze.
We see this as a huge opportunity, both from sourcing deals,
we think there's indigenous capability that is not being utilized
and
capitalized on. We see huge pools of capital and
these are growth assets for investors
and
job creators as well, so we see huge opportunities there.
So I'm not going to presuppose what those things are because we generally want to
listen and work out how we can help.
And our help will be through identifying opportunities to co-invest or
to work alongside or to help build investor capability.
And that's where we're going to be focused on.
We need to work an awful lot harder on it.
Yeah. I'm Maori, and I'm working with various,
and engaging with
the iwis that I know, and there are funds, and one of the critical
issues is getting enough critical mass
to make a fund big enough. And that's really one of
the things that we've got to overcome is get enough Maori
engaged to get a fund that's big enough that it can pay the fees to
support itself. So there are some structural things, but there is
intent and there are people out there, and so there is engagement. For sure.
In terms of the 0% that you mentioned, what's the engagement plan to
increase that?
So it's working through. There
have been previous Maori GPs, and we're working with them.
There's a couple sort of working on private equity funds again.
So it's really working with people like Grant and other advisors
to, one, understand the pool. We've done things in the past
to build to comments into our organization to help
develop talent at the grassroots as well.
So, it'll be a combination of all of those, I think.
Uh, finally, Dr. David.
Yeah. Just on private equity-
Very quick
... creating it use.
Yeah.
Appreciate the work you're doing with iwi in
creating that market. We know overall, though, it's very thin.
Right.
So can you just explain how that's going, especially in tough
times right now? How are we actually increasing private equity?
Yeah, the money going into the space is growing.
So I look at when we formed, there was around $72
million available for the whole of the venture capital ecosystem.
Wow.
Now there is hundreds of millions of dollars.
We are expecting another few new funds to be coming to market over the
next 12 months. So again, it will be growing.
It is still incredibly thin, though, at the
bottom end. And then emerging managers, we are
taking some risk, but we can't take too much risk, so we have to be...
And we want to raise the bar as we go, each vintage of
investing in sort of higher and higher quality managers.
So, there is more capital going in.
There is a bigger pipeline attracting at a later stage, more overseas
capital. But the amount of institutional money really hasn't
moved at all. We've got one or two KiwiSavers that are in the space.
Yeah.
But generally, most of the KiwiSaver funds have very low exposure to alternatives,
let alone VC.
All right. Looks like that's all we have for now.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Good work.
Very good.